## Introduction

The study of genetic disease in animal models has a long history, and commercial genetic testing has been used to guide agricultural breeding practices for over 20 years [@doi:10.1038/nrg701].
Animal genetic testing is a booming industry, that is expected to continue growingexpected to grow over the next five years [@url:https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2021/03/08/2188474/0/en/Animal-Genetics-Market-revenue-to-cross-USD-6-4-Bn-by-2027-Global-Market-Insights-Inc.html].
Commercial testing for genetic risk factors has been common for dogs [@doi:10.1016/j.tvjl.2011.06.025] and cats [@doi:10.1016/j.mcp.2012.04.004] for over a decade.
Over that same time period, direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing for humans has grown into an established industry [CITE].
Such Thesegenetic tests allow require consumers to collect a specimen (usually a buccal swab) at homehome and, ship it to a the company where it will be sequenced and processed.
The individual receives a report containing information about their ancestry and, in some cases, the likelihood of possessing certain genetic traits (e.g., hair color) and risk of developing various genetic diseases.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, aA parallel industry of DTC genetic profiling of companion animals, primarily dogs, has also emerged.
For these companion testsInstead of swabbing their own cheek,In these tests, a consumers are instructed toConsumers collect a buccal swab from a pet instead of swabbing their own cheek.
That pet sample that is then shipped to the company, which sequences and analyzes it.
The sample is analyzed for ancestry (breed mix) and/or genotypes associated with certain traits or diseases.
The consumer receives a report containing this information, similar to the human DTC equivalent.
Dogs were the first ]{.
comment-end id="64"}[domesticated animal [CITE], and dog husbandry has a rich history [CITE], and as a result, the genetic signature of dog breeds is more distinct than in many other species.
Additionally, dog breeds are, in the strict sense, closed breeding populations due to dog their[%83-start] husbandry ]{.
comment-end id="83"}[practices, and so dog breed ancestry can be estimated based onon the basis ofbased on genetic variants associated with specific breeds. Therefore, the ability of a dog breed ancestry test to assign breed(s)This analysis depends on two three variables: first, the density of genetic markers analyzed, and second, the thebreed coverages and ; second, the set of breeds included in the reference panel; and third, and diversity of breeds and traits individuals from within each breed available to compare the results represented inagainstwithin the databasepanel. Most Many modernof these DTC genetic tests assay single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using a microarray-based profiling, or "chip,"", but while some a few use other techniqueswhole-genome sequencing or even copy-number variation, presumably of short-tandem repeats (STRs) (Table ??). The genetic variations observed in an individual dog is then compared against a panel of genetic variants from the reference panel of a variety of breeds and individuals using algorithms that are typically proprietary. However, most approaches use unsupervised ]{.comment-end id="145"}[clustering and similarity metrics comparing their existing training data (sometimes including results from previous DTC tests) to the new dog sample.
This approach allows for classification of theFrom the individual's genetic variants to assigns one or morepotential breeds, which can then be deconvolved into measured as sources of genetic ancestryare assigned for the individual's genetic variants.

**Comparison of six DTC dog genetic testing services.
** At the time of study design (end of 2021), 6 DTC dog tests were available on the public market.
All 6 were included in this study.These were the six tests on the market at the end of 2021, when the present study began.
To the extent that the information is available, Each test uses a distinct combination of genotyping technologies, breed classification algorithms, and reference panels (see {#tbl:tests}).
While this study focuses on the methodologies, a detailed breakdown of consumer-oriented similarities and differences among several of these tests is available elsewhere [@url:https://www.caninejournal.com/dog-dna-tests-reviews].
{#tbl:tests}

| Test/Company Name                               | Price of Base Breed Test   | Markers Used                                                                                                                    | Reference Panel                                                                                                           | Ancestry Assignment Algorithm             |
|:------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------|
| Embark Breed Test                               | $129-$199                  | 200,000+ SNPs, CanineHD SNP chip with additional probes                                                                         | 350+ breeds                                                                                                               | Not specified                             |
| Wisdom Panel Breed Discovery                    | $80-$160                   | SNPs, number not specified, use custom genotyping chip                                                                          | 350+ breeds, 21,000+ samples [@url:https://www.wisdompanel.com/en-us/our-science; @url:https://www.wisdompanel.com/en-us] | BCSYS                                     |
| Orivet GenoPet                                  | $95-160                    | SNPs, number not specified [@url:https://www.orivet.com/store/canine-mixed-breed-screen/geno-pet-dog-breed-identification-test] | 320+ breeds [@url:https://www.orivet.com/store/breed-list]                                                                | Not specified                             |
| Darwin's Ark Explorer Level Donation            | $149 donation              | Call millions of SNPs from whole-genome sequencing, use 688,060 for breed mix classification [@url:https://darwinsark.org/faqs] | 101 breeds                                                                                                                | SupportMix [@doi:10.1186/1471-2156-13-49] |
| DNA My Dog Essential Breed ID Test              | $80-$130                   | Copy-number variation, number of markers not specified [@url:https://dnamydog.com/help/help-centre]                             | 350+ breeds                                                                                                               | Not specified                             |
| Accu-Metrics/Via-Pet Canine Breed Determination | $59                        | Not specified                                                                                                                   | 340 breeds [@url:https://www.via-pet.com/canine-testing/p/dog-breed-identification]                                       | Not specified                             |

We evaluated six DTC tests on the market at the end of 2021 when our study began.
One expects test results to differ between tests bBecause the methodologies used to assign ancestry and the make-up of theand the comparison panels are likely to differ, it is expected that results would could typically vary across tests.
However, crowd-sourced results posted on, as available through the "DoggyDNA" subreddit [@url:https://www.reddit.com/r/DoggyDNA], suggest that some users receive wildly different results, beyond what would be expected based on from the known methodologic differences in methodologies.
In investigating such discrepancies, we noted that Most of these the DTC tests either include the option (for or require) the user to upload a photograph of the dog to be submitted.
, despite the tests being advertised as based on genetics only.
Depending on how the photographic information is incorporated into the breed identification pipeline, it could hold the potentially potential topotentially bias the results.
Therefore, weThis study sought to assess whether the photograph uploaded with a DNA sample influencedassess the impact of photographic information on breed ancestry estimation by six DTC dog genetic testing companies, in addition to their overall genetic accuracy.

To accomplish this, WeWe recruited 12 purebred dogs and submitted their buccal DNA samples along withand a photograph to six companies (Table ??).
For half the dogstests, , we submitted the DNA sample was submitted with a photograph of the DNA donor.
For the other half, we swapped photos were swapped between dogs so that each DNA sample was submitted with a photograph of a different purebred dog.
We evaluated whether predicted breeds matched the donor's registered breed.
This design allowed us to evaluate whether the photograph had a significant effectaffected on ancestry estimation.
Additionally, we evaluated whether DTC test breed predictions matched the donor's registered breed.We added a photograph-only baseline using a deep neural network trained to identify dog breeds.
This design allows us In doing so, we are able to provide a formal comparison of differences in breed ancestry estimation across different platforms.

