## Results

Twelve purebred dogs were recruited from households around the United States to have DNA samples collected by their owners (Table @tbl:subjects).
Most results were returned from the DTC genetic testing companies between August 2021 and February 2023.
Some results from Orivet were delayed due to an issue with the user interface and were returned in June 2023.
Results were not received for four samples.
One, sent to Darwin's Ark, was lost between leaving the dog owner's house and being processed, and the company was responsive in providing updates and offering to replace it, although based on timing it was ultimately dropped from the study.
The remaining three lost samples were sent to Accu-Metrics, and as of June 2023, no status update could be obtained from the company.

| Breed                      | VBO Identifier   | Breed Clade      | Registry Organization   | Condition   | Photograph                 |
|:---------------------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:------------------------|:------------|:---------------------------|
| Beagle                     | VBO:0200131      | Scent Hound      | UKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Border Terrier             | VBO:0200194      | Terrier          | AKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Golden Retriever           | VBO:0200610      | Retriever        | AKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Pomeranian                 | VBO:0201043      | Small Spitz      | AKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Shetland Sheepdog          | VBO:0201217      | UK Rural         | AKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Shih Tzu                   | VBO:0201223      | Asian Toy        | CKC                     | Control     | Self                       |
| Brittany                   | VBO:0200238      | Pointer/Setter   | AKC                     | Treatment   | Chinese Crested            |
| Chinese Crested            | VBO:0200345      | American Toy     | AKC                     | Treatment   | Brittany                   |
| German Shorthaired Pointer | VBO:0200583      | Pointer/Setter   | AKC                     | Treatment   | Italian Greyhound          |
| Italian Greyhound          | VBO:0200713      | UK Rural         | AKC                     | Treatment   | German Shorthaired Pointer |
| Bulldog                    | VBO:0200258      | European Mastiff | AKC                     | Treatment   | Labrador Retriever         |
| Labrador Retriever         | VBO:0200800      | Retriever        | AKC                     | Treatment   | Bulldog                    |

Table: Background information on the twelve canine participants.
All dogs were registered with a breed organization (AKC = American Kennel Club; UKC = United Kennel Club; CKC = Continental Kennel Club).
Breed clade was assigned based on phylogeny [@DOI:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.079] as opposed to the breed groups used by breed organizations such as the AKC.
{#tbl:subjects}

For all dogs, the registered breed was always the majority estimate, and at least one DTC test returned a result 100% consistent with the registered breed (Figure @fig:pies; Supplementary Table 4).
In most cases, at least one test's breed prediction did not match the registered breed.
Most tests returned at least one result that did not match the dog's breed organization registration.
Our analysis focused on evaluating whether the reported ancestry deviated from the expected ancestry, which in purebreds is 100% of a single breed, so minor differences in how results were reported by different companies did not affect our analyses.

![
Figure: Breed ancestry predictions from six DTC dog genetic testing companies as well as a pretrained image classifier.
For the control condition, the breeds of the donor and photograph match, so the registered breed is depicted as purple.
In the treatment condition, these are separated into blue (DNA donor) and red (photographed breed).
All other breeds are represented in other colors as identified in the legend.
](images/test_results.png){#fig:pies secno=1}

All but 4 of the breed estimates mapped unambiguously to the VBO (Supplementary Table 1).
In one case, a result returned by NASNet ("Lhasa") is not a known dog breed.
"Lhasa Apso" was assumed to be the intended breed.
In the other three cases, two or more potential VBO terms could correspond to the breed result.
In two cases, VBO developers were consulted to select the best mapping.
The last case was Catahoula Leopard Dog, a dog breed with a complex history that could correspond to three VBO entries.
However, this result was returned only by one test for one dog, negating the need for standardization, and we simply selected the closest VBO term to the exact phrasing used in the breed result.
The translation of qualitative to quantitative results is provided in Supplementary Table 2, and the standardization of NASNet's predictions are shown in Supplementary Table 3.

Another difference in the way results were reported across tests was that Darwin's Ark provided a two-component breed prediction.
As Darwin's Ark evaluates ancestry and genetic diversity separately, they provided not only the most genetically similar breeds but also an explicit prediction of whether a dog was likely to be purebred.
We used these determinations of breed, rather than the ancestry percentages (Figure @fig:pies), to assess whether Darwin Ark's result matched the registered breed (Table @tbl:accuracy).
Of the 11 samples for which results were returned, Darwin's Ark successfully discerned that all donors were purebred, even when some genetic variants were assigned to other breeds (Table @tbl:accuracy).

| Breed Prediction Approach   | Overall Results Matching Breed   | Control Matching   | Treatment Matching   | Odds Ratio (p)   |
|:----------------------------|:---------------------------------|:-------------------|:---------------------|:-----------------|
| Wisdom Panel                | 12/12 (100%)                     | 6/6 (100%)         | 6/6 (100%)           | 1.0 (1.00)       |
| Darwin's Ark                | 11/11 (100%)                     | 6/6 (100%)         | 5/5 (100%)           | 1.2 (1.00)       |
| Embark                      | 10/12 (83%)                      | 5/6 (83%)          | 5/6 (83%)            | 1.0 (0.773)      |
| DNA My Dog                  | 8/12 (67%)                       | 4/6 (67%)          | 4/6 (67%)            | 1.0 (0.727)      |
| Orivet                      | 7/12 (58%)                       | 3/5 (60%)          | 4/7 (57%)            | 1.1 (0.689)      |
| NASNet                      | 2/12 (17%)                       | 2/6 (33%)          | 0/6 (0%)             | 7.2 (0.227)      |
| Accu-Metrics                | 0/9 (0%)                         | 0/4 (0%)           | 0/5 (0%)             | 1.2 (1.00)       |

Table: Comparison of six DTC genetic tests and one pretrained image classifier (NASNet) to the registered breed of each dog.
The overall concordance with breed registration and the breakdown between the two conditions are reported.
The Haldane-Anscombe correction was applied when one or more cells were zero.
P-values were calculated using a one-tailed hypergeometric test.
Note: for Orivet, the conditions were not balanced because, due to experimenter error, one control subject (Golden Retriever) was submitted with two photographs (the photograph of the DNA donor and of the Pomeranian).
Also, due to sample loss, only 11 dogs were tested using Darwin's Ark and 9 for Accu-Metrics versus 12 for the other DTC tests.
{#tbl:accuracy}

We note that the primary outcome selected *a priori* (Table @tbl:accuracy) did not capture apparent qualitative differences (Figure @fig:pies).
This discrepancy was driven by the fact that, in several cases, the breeds predicted by a test matched neither the DNA nor the photograph.
This pattern was particularly apparent for the image classifier and one DTC genetic test (ViaPet by Accu-Metrics).
In the case of the neural network, this was likely influenced by the limited number of breeds in the training data, and thus category labels, in ImageNet [@url:http://vision.stanford.edu/aditya86/ImageNetDogs].
For example, ImageNet is not trained to identify Chinese Crested and Bulldog breeds.
In the case of the genetic test, the results may have been influenced by the fact that the test predicted the registered breed zero times across both the control and treatment conditions (Table @tbl:accuracy).
Re-evaluating the results at the level of breed clades (Figure @fig:tern) revealed that, in both cases, the predicted breeds were more similar to the photographs provided than to the DNA sample analyzed.
While the effects did not meet the level of statistical significance (Supplementary Table 5), the odds ratios indicate that the treatment condition had a similar effect on the ability of NASNet and Accu-Metrics to predict the breed of the DNA donor (odds ratio of 13 versus 11).
Given that NASNet assigned breeds based solely on photograph, it was expected to incorrectly predict the treatment samples (which had shuffled photos).
The fact that a similar effect was observed for predictions made by Accu-Metrics suggests that the photograph was also influential in the analysis made by this DTC dog genetic test.

![
Figure:
Ternary plots identifying the breed clades of results predicted by each test.
Each dog is represented by a circle in blue (control) or red (treatment).
The position of the circle relative to the three axes indicates the percentage of results belonging to the breed clade of the DNA donor, photographed dog, or other clades.
A result that is 100% concordant with the DNA donor’s registered breed will be placed at the apex of the triangle.
A result that is 100% concordant with the photographed dog’s breed (in the treatment condition only) will be located at the top left.
Offset from these positions can be interpreted by looking at the position relative to the other two vertices on a 0 to 100 scale.
Darker colors indicate multiple circles mapping to the same position.
](images/ternary.png){#fig:tern secno=1} 
