## Discussion

This study applied an experimental paradigm to assess the state of DTC genetic testing for dogs and revealed qualitative and quantitative differences in the breed ancestry estimates of six providers.
By modulating whether DNA was submitted with a matched or mismatched photograph, we evaluated whether this non-genetic information influenced breed predictions.
Using a pre-trained convolutional neural network, NASNet, allowed us to compare the predictions made by DTC genetic tests to those made from the photograph alone.
Ultimately, this analysis demonstrated a low rate of consensus across tests in estimating the breed makeup, even of registered purebred dogs.
The results suggest that at least one company is providing results influenced by the photograph provided.

Both NASNet and Accu-Metrics were unlikely to identify the registered breed as 100% of the ancestry, regardless of condition.
When breed ancestry estimates were evaluated at the clade level, there was a significant effect of the photograph on the predictions made by NASNet and Accu-Metrics; the clades of the predicted breeds matched that of the dog in the photograph instead of the DNA donor (Figure {@fig:tern}).
For NASNet, which is an image recognition tool, this result was expected; however, Accu-Metrics collects a DNA sample and even rejected one submission for failing quality control.
The lack of a relationship between the company's breed predictions and the provided DNA samples suggests that Accu-Metrics used the photograph, rather than the DNA, to make its predictions.

In overall performance, Accu-Metrics was less successful in predicting a dog's breed than NASNet, with an overall rate of 0% versus 17% (Table {@tbl:accuracy}).
NASNet may have had even higher performance if more breeds were included in its training dataset, given that it did not have any point of reference for some of the breeds examined in this study (e.g., Chinese Crested).
The Chinese Crested photograph was, incidentally, the only photograph that Accu-Metrics identified as 100% matching the registered breed of the photographed dog (Supplementary Table 4); in this case, however, the photograph of the Chinese Crested was submitted along with DNA from a Brittany.
Therefore, this study suggests that Accu-Metrics is not providing accurate information about genetic ancestry, although the product has been promoted by companies such as the pet pharmacy PetMeds [@url:https://blog.petmeds.com/pet-supplies-products/viaguard-dnaffirm-canine-dna-testing-kit].

Among the remaining five DTC testing services, the rate of predicting the registered breed of the DNA donor was very high, regardless of the condition.
This result suggests that these companies are indeed analyzing the DNA as the basis for their breed ancestry predictions.
Additionally, because the statistical analysis did not support an effect of condition on the odds that the photographed breed (or its close relatives) was included in the predictions, the results suggest that these tests are not biased by the photographs.

While it is interesting to explore differences in the results produced by different tests, it is important to note that this study was not designed to evaluate the accuracy of the tests' genetic ancestry predictions.
This point is especially relevant to tests with extremely high performance.
While Wisdom Panel returned a prediction that matched the DNA donor's registered breed 100% of the time, this does not mean it is necessarily more accurate than Embark or Orivet.
Differences among tests, such as the number of markers analyzed (Table {@tbl:tests}) are expected to contribute to differences in test resolution and breed prediction capabilities.
Additionally, the specific breeds and specific dogs included in a company’s reference panel can have a strong effect on breed assignment.

Among the twelve purebred dogs tested, some received more consistent predictions than others.
For more than half the dogs, there was consensus among five DTC genetic tests (excluding Accu-Metrics) about their breed (Figure {@tbl:accuracy}).
Among the others, though the registered breed was always the major ancestry estimate from each of the five DTC tests, they often differed in what other breeds were predicted to contribute to ancestry.
Pedigrees are not infallible, and therefore mistaken parentage could be a source for some of this variation.
However, it also underscores the complexity of the question of genetic ancestry versus a socially defined population, i.e., breed.
Therefore, even with the ground truth provided by using registered dogs, some sources of genetic variation are difficult to determine.

One notable example comes from the German Shorthaired Pointer (GSP), which belongs to the Pointer/Setter clade [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.079].
In this study, the GSP sample was submitted with a photograph of an Italian Greyhound, which belongs to the UK Rural clade [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.079].
Embark and Wisdom Panel each identified this dog as 100% GSP (Figure {@tbl:accuracy}).
Orivet and Darwin's Ark both identified GSP as the dog's primary ancestor (82% and 69%, respectively), but also included other Pointer/Setter breeds such as the Vizsla [@doi:10.1111/age.12834] in their ancestry estimates.
In addition to the GSP, Vizsla, and an additional 20% of the dog's genetic variation that could not be assigned to a breed, Darwin's Ark also predicted Drever ancestry; the Drever is a Swedish scent hound related to the Dachshund [@doi:10.1111/age.12834; @url:https://web.archive.org/web/20090730055525/http://www.deutscher-bracken-club.de/pages/die-bracken/historie.php; @url:https://dreverusa.org/drever-history], introducing another breed clade.
Alternatively, DNA My Dog identified 59% of the dog's ancestry as GSP and the remainder as German Shepherd Dog and Catahoula Leopard Dog, both of which are North American breeds [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.079; @doi:10.1126/science.aao4776].
Thus, while these three tests all predicted that 20-40% of the genome was indicative of non-GSP ancestry, there was substantial variation in the assignment of this DNA across tests.
While it is not possible to extrapolate why the three tests arrived at different predictions, the fact that both Wisdom Panel and Embark, which are the most popular and comprehensive DTC canine genetic tests, identified the dog's ancestry as 100% GSP suggests that the dog carries some less-common GSP genetic variation that is not present in the comparison panels used by the smaller companies.
Less-common variants in this individual dog, combined with differences in the sample size of the reference panel, could explain why both Darwin's Ark and Orivet assigned some DNA to non-GSP breeds within the Pointer/Setter clade.
However, it would explain neither the Drever result from Darwin's Ark nor the New World breeds assigned by DNA My Dog.

Similar narratives also arose from the ancestry predictions for two other dogs.
In the case of the Beagle, Embark and Wisdom Panel agreed on 100% Beagle ancestry, while Orivet, DNA My Dog, and Darwin's Ark all reported >90% Beagle ancestry.
The sources of non-Beagle ancestry were scent hounds and/or pointer/setters or drovers.
In the case of the Shih Tzu, there was convergence among tests on potential Asian-Toy or Poodle ancestry that accounted for 5-20% of genetic ancestry (Supplementary Table 4).

There was also a lack of consensus among DTC tests for the Labrador Retriever.
Wisdom Panel and DNA My Dog were the only tests to identify her as 100% Labrador Retriever.
Embark predicted that she carries 5.5% American Foxhound DNA, suggesting a Foxhound ancestor approximately five generations ago.
This individual dog's pedigree indicates that six of her sixteen great-grandparents were enrolled in the AKC's Voluntary DNA Profile Program, which allows breeders to confirm their dogs' parentage.
Therefore, the foxhound admixture is unlikely to come from these six ancestors.
However, among the remaining ten great-grandparents, it is possible that one had mistaken parentage and an American Foxhound parent, especially since Embark's chromosome chart for this dog suggested inheritance of Foxhound ancestry from only one parent.
The other high-resolution test, Darwin's Ark, estimated a similar amount (5.9%) of non-Labrador ancestry for this dog.
However, Darwin's Ark does not currently include the American Foxhound in its reference panel, and instead assigned this non-Labrador ancestry to Viszla (3.0%) and unknown (2.9%).
Notably, although Orivet includes the American Foxhound in its reference panel, it identified 11.3% of this dog's ancestry as Collie (8.4%) and McNab (2.9%), but not American Foxhound.
The Collie is a UK Rural breed, while the McNab Shepherd is an American creation bred from Collies and Basque shepherd dogs of unknown ancestry [@url:https://www.mcnabshepherdregistry.com/dog/history].
Thus, once again, no simple story can be discerned by comparing the results across different tests.
This Labrador may have one great-grandparent with non-Labrador ancestry, but no consensus arose about what this ancestry could be.
In contrast to the GSP, however, none of the tests assigned the ancestry to a breed closely related to the Labrador, aligning more with historical admixture than rare breed-specific genetic variants.
Here, it is worth noting that Embark and Darwin's Ark conduct very high resolution analyses due to their marker density (Table 1), providing a possible explanation for why they would detect a ~5% non-Labrador ancestry when tests like Wisdom Panel did not.
It is, therefore, possible that this result is an illustration of ascertainment bias (a type of sampling bias), where lower-resolution tests either failed to detect any non-Labrador variants or overestimated the non-Labrador contribution.
Unfortunately, because the number of SNPs used by several tests (including Orivet) is not publicly available, it is impossible to know definitively whether this is the case.

As a third and final example of disagreement in breed estimation, DNA My Dog was alone in reporting that the purebred Bulldog had 10-20% wolf ancestry.
This result would be consistent with a full wolf ancestor three generations ago.
While not all tests evaluate the genome for non-dog contributions, Embark, Wisdom Panel, Orivet, and DNA My Dog all do.
Therefore, it would be surprising for all the other tests to miss such a high percentage of wolf ancestry.
One possible explanation is that DNA My Dog uses copy number variation, whereas the other tests use SNPs (Table {@tbl:tests}).
It is well known that different genetic tools can paint different pictures of a population's history (e.g., [@doi:10.1111/jbg.12017; @doi:10.1111/mec.13038]).
However, a recent media report indicated that DNA My Dog failed to identify the species of a sample, assigning dog breeds to human DNA [@url:https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/marketplace-dog-dna-test-1.6763274].
While our analysis provides evidence that the company did sequence the DNA samples we submitted, it is possible that other issues (e.g., contamination) could cause issues in both species identification and breed prediction.

This analysis demonstrates the complexity of the DTC dog genetic testing market.
In one case, the results we received were independent of the DNA submitted.
Among the five other tests, the results clearly demonstrate that methodological literacy is essential for interpreting DTC test results.
Factors such as the DNA marker type and SNP panel density analyzed, the size and composition of the breed reference panel, and the assignment algorithm can change how variants in the DNA are identified, interpreted, and assigned to breeds and diseases.
Unfortunately, the average consumer is unlikely to have the necessary information or training to critically evaluate such aspects when selecting a DTC genetic test [@doi:10.1159/000327159].

Lack of public literacy related to genetic testing and transparency in DTC test methodologies is especially concerning in this context, because dog breed ancestry can have social and economic consequences.
For example, many home insurance companies refuse to cover certain dog breeds such as Pitbulls (e.g., American Staffordshire Terriers) and Rottweilers.
In our current sample of twelve purebred dogs (none of which are banned by more than 5% of insurance companies [@url:https://www.forbes.com/advisor/homeowners-insurance/banned-dog-breed-lists]), four dogs were identified by at least one test as having ancestry banned by more than 50% of companies.
DNA My Dog identified the Bulldog as a wolf hybrid and the Beagle as part Rottweiler.
Accu-Metrics identified both the GSP and Golden Retriever as part American Staffordshire Terrier.
None of these ancestry predictions were supported by any other DTC tests.
Therefore, dog owners could face severe financial repercussions in terms of home insurance and even housing rental eligibility if the results of a DTC test are viewed as definitive [@https://www.realtor.com/advice/buy/insurance-companies-discriminate-against-your-dog] or if DTC canine genetic testing are adopted for housing and insurance purposes.
Given that DTC genetic services are being used by some rental companies for pet waste identification [@url:https://siouxlandnews.com/news/local/dna-testing-your-dog-why-apartment-complexes-are-now-making-it-a-requirement], it is not difficult to envision landlords conducting or requiring breed testing as well [@url:https://www.sltrib.com/news/homeprices/2021/06/18/some-utah-landlords-want; @url:https://www.zumper.com/blog/how-do-apartments-verify-dog-breeds].
Additionally, it is legal for companies to decline to insure or to raise premiums for dog owners who they believe own a restricted breed [@url:https://www.sltrib.com/news/homeprices/2021/06/18/some-utah-landlords-want; @url:https://www.zumper.com/blog/how-do-apartments-verify-dog-breeds].
While insurance companies do not typically require DNA tests, many sources advise renters and homeowners to submit their dog's DNA results if they believe they were erroneously rejected for coverage because of their dog [@https://www.realtor.com/advice/buy/insurance-companies-discriminate-against-your-dog; @url:https://www.mspca.org/pet_resources/home-insurance-and-pets; @url:https://www.quickenloans.com/learn/homeowners-insurance-and-dogs; @url:https://www.fool.com/the-ascent/insurance/homeowners/articles/how-your-dog-can-impact-the-cost-of-homeowners-insurance; @https://www.valuepenguin.com/homeowners-insurance-restricted-dog-breeds].
Notably, several of these websites suggest that canine DNA tests can be purchased for around $50.
Currently, DTC dog genetic test results cost on average $99, and Accu-Metrics is the only test available for less than $80.
While breed discrimination in renting and insurance is controversial [@https://www.realtor.com/advice/buy/insurance-companies-discriminate-against-your-dog; @url:https://www.quickenloans.com/learn/homeowners-insurance-and-dogs; @https://www.valuepenguin.com/homeowners-insurance-restricted-dog-breeds], including inaccurate breed ancestry estimates will only serve to further muddy an already complicated issue.

It is also imperative to consider the context of the other services that many DTC genetic tests provide: health predictions.
Despite being priced similarly to human DTC test kits, DTC canine genetic testing is not held to the same regulatory standards as human testing in the United States.
Some services (Embark, Wisdom Panel, and Orivet) provide information about specific risk variants that a dog does or does not possess.
DNA My Dog and Accu-Metrics, on the other hand, provide general information about health risks based on the breeds detected.
The potential for such information to be misunderstood and misapplied has been widely discussed as a general risk of DTC genetic testing [@doi:10.1146/annurev-med-070119-114727].
The human DTC market underwent a major shift in the mid-2010s when the FDA began regulating the health results they are allowed to provide to consumers [@doi:10.1146/annurev-med-070119-114727; @url:https://www.genome.gov/For-Health-Professionals/Provider-Genomics-Education-Resources/Healthcare-Provider-Direct-to-Consumer-Genetic-Testing-FAQ.
Genetic information can contribute to pet owners' decisions regarding their pet's health, and when this information is incorrect or is interpreted incorrectly, it can lead to tragedy [@doi:10.1038/d41586-018-05771-0].
The team of scientists leading Darwin's Ark has been outspoken about this potential for misuse [@doi:10.1038/d41586-018-05771-0], and Darwin's Ark does not provide health predictions because of a lack of rigorous standards for these estimations [@url:https://darwinsark.org/faqs].
The extent to which health predictions differ among tests would also be an interesting question for future studies of the industry.
However, the results from this study make it clear that improved regulation is essential to ensure that consumers are receiving accurate information from DTC canine genetic testing companies.

For more than a decade, concerns have been raised about the potential pitfalls of human DTC genetic testing, especially when combined with limited regulatory oversight.
Now, veterinary medicine faces several related issues.
Our systematic comparison of DTC genetic tests for dogs suggests that it is imperative that consumers approach DTC test results with care.
Veterinarians are likely to be placed in a position where they need to educate pet owners about genetic tests that the veterinarians did not order or recommend.
Many factors influence the results, potentially resulting in surprising predictions.
While we did not analyze health or trait predictions, this study shows that ancestry predictions were often at odds with the dogs' pedigree registration, even for AKC-registered dogs (10 out of the 12 participants).
For one test, the DNA sample submitted had little bearing on the results, whereas the photograph heavily influenced breed predictions.
Our findings suggest that DTC genetic test results should be interpreted very cautiously.
As DTC testing expands to make predictions about pet health (from dietary needs [@url:https://www.petfoodindustry.com/pet-food-market/article/15462714/dna-tests-reveal-customized-pet-food-diet-for-a-mutt] to age [@url:https://shop.embarkvet.com/products/dog-age]), veterinarians may face increased calls to educate owners about the limits of genetic testing.

